README.md, before:

# ONT QC MCP

Model Context Protocol server exposing lightweight QC/EDA helpers for Oxford Nanopore FASTQ and BAM/CRAM inputs. The server wraps common CLI tools and returns machine-readable summaries for educational and practical workflows.

## Features
- FASTQ read-level QC via `nanoq` (read count, length/N50, GC, q-score/length histograms).
- BAM/CRAM alignment QC via `cramino` (mapping breakdown, identity, MAPQ hist).
- Depth-of-coverage via `mosdepth`.
- Read filtering/trimming via `chopper`.
- Optional plotting helpers (length/qscore histograms) when `matplotlib` is installed.
- Environment validation for required CLI tools.
- Per-tool runtime guidance via MCP resources to help LLM tool selection.
- Non-blocking execution: CLI calls are offloaded to worker threads with configurable timeouts and thread defaults.

## Requirements
- Python >= 3.10
- CLI tools on `PATH` (override via env vars):
  - `NANOQ` (default `nanoq`)
  - `CRAMINO` (default `cramino`)
  - `MOSDEPTH` (default `mosdepth`)
  - `CHOPPER` (default `chopper`)
  - `SAMTOOLS` (default `samtools`) for error profiling

## Quick start
```bash
pip install -e .
ont-qc-mcp  # launches the MCP stdio server
```

## MCP tools (high level)
- `qc_reads`: nanoq read-level QC (counts, lengths, qscore histogram).
- `filter_reads`: chopper filtering/trimming; returns command + stats.
- `read_length_distribution`: percentiles + histogram from nanoq.
- `qscore_distribution`: per-read q-score histogram from nanoq.
- `qc_alignment`: cramino alignment QC (mapped/unmapped, identity, MAPQ hist; use `use_scaled` for base-weighted bins).
- `coverage_stats`: mosdepth coverage summary.
- `alignment_error_profile`: error rates parsed from `samtools stats`.
- `alignment_summary`: aggregates cramino + mosdepth (+ error profile).
- `env_status`: report availability and resolved paths for all tools.
- `header_metadata_tool`: extract BAM/CRAM/VCF header metadata (contigs, samples, programs) plus a concise summary.
- Guidance resource: `tool://guidance/{tool}` returns runtime hints, defaults (threads/timeouts), and links to flag schemas/recipes to help orchestration layers decide whether to call a tool.

## Execution defaults and configurability
- CLI calls are executed in worker threads to avoid blocking the MCP event loop.
- Defaults are conservative and overridable via environment variables:
  - `MCP_THREADS_DEFAULT` / `MCP_THREADS_<TOOL>` (e.g., `MCP_THREADS_NANOQ`)
  - `MCP_TIMEOUT_DEFAULT` / `MCP_TIMEOUT_<TOOL>` (seconds; e.g., `MCP_TIMEOUT_MOSDEPTH`)
- Per-tool defaults are also reflected in the guidance resource and tool descriptions returned by `list_tools`.

## Development
```bash
pip install -e ".[dev]"           # tests + linting/coverage helpers
pip install -e ".[plots]"         # add matplotlib for PNG histograms
pip install -e ".[all]"           # everything above in one go
pytest
```

## Notes
- Outputs are JSON-first to play well with downstream pipelines.
- Plotting helpers emit file paths (PNG); no base64 payloads are returned.

Commit message:

Enhance coverage and alignment tools with optional low coverage threshold and error profile inclusion. Update schemas and error handling for improved validation. Refactor header format detection and add tests for new functionality.

README.md, after:

# ONT QC MCP

Model Context Protocol server exposing lightweight QC/EDA helpers for Oxford Nanopore FASTQ and BAM/CRAM inputs. The server wraps common CLI tools and returns machine-readable summaries for educational and practical workflows.

## Features
- FASTQ read-level QC via `nanoq` (read count, length/N50, GC, q-score/length histograms).
- BAM/CRAM alignment QC via `cramino` (mapping breakdown, identity, MAPQ hist).
- Depth-of-coverage via `mosdepth`.
- Read filtering/trimming via `chopper`.
- Optional plotting helpers (length/qscore histograms) when `matplotlib` is installed.
- Environment validation for required CLI tools.
- Per-tool runtime guidance via MCP resources to help LLM tool selection.
- Non-blocking execution: CLI calls are offloaded to worker threads with configurable timeouts and thread defaults.

## Requirements
- Python >= 3.10
- CLI tools on `PATH` (override via env vars):
  - `NANOQ` (default `nanoq`)
  - `CRAMINO` (default `cramino`)
  - `MOSDEPTH` (default `mosdepth`)
  - `CHOPPER` (default `chopper`)
  - `SAMTOOLS` (default `samtools`) for error profiling

## Quick start
```bash
pip install -e .
ont-qc-mcp  # launches the MCP stdio server
```

### Consistent environment for tests/tools
- Use `scripts/with-env.sh` to set PATH and venv for all commands: `scripts/with-env.sh pytest`.
- It prepends conda CLI tools (`/Users/saganezov/miniforge3/envs/ont-qc-mcp/bin`) and cargo-installed `nanoq` (`/Users/saganezov/.cargo/bin`), then activates `.venv`.
- Keep `.venv` in the repo root; if missing, the script warns and continues.

## MCP tools (high level)
- `qc_reads`: nanoq read-level QC (counts, lengths, qscore histogram).
- `filter_reads`: chopper filtering/trimming; returns command + stats.
- `read_length_distribution`: percentiles + histogram from nanoq.
- `qscore_distribution`: per-read q-score histogram from nanoq.
- `qc_alignment`: cramino alignment QC (mapped/unmapped, identity, MAPQ hist; use `use_scaled` for base-weighted bins).
- `coverage_stats`: mosdepth coverage summary.
- `alignment_error_profile`: error rates parsed from `samtools stats`.
- `alignment_summary`: aggregates cramino + mosdepth (+ error profile).
- `env_status`: report availability and resolved paths for all tools.
- `header_metadata_tool`: extract BAM/CRAM/VCF header metadata (contigs, samples, programs) plus a concise summary.
- Guidance resource: `tool://guidance/{tool}` returns runtime hints, defaults (threads/timeouts), and links to flag schemas/recipes to help orchestration layers decide whether to call a tool.
- Defaults stay lightweight; heavier steps (error profiles, quantized/threshold coverage) are opt-in via flags.

## Execution defaults and configurability
- CLI calls are executed in worker threads to avoid blocking the MCP event loop.
- Defaults are conservative and overridable via environment variables:
  - `MCP_THREADS_DEFAULT` / `MCP_THREADS_<TOOL>` (e.g., `MCP_THREADS_NANOQ`)
  - `MCP_TIMEOUT_DEFAULT` / `MCP_TIMEOUT_<TOOL>` (seconds; e.g., `MCP_TIMEOUT_MOSDEPTH`)
- Per-tool defaults are also reflected in the guidance resource and tool descriptions returned by `list_tools`.
- Coverage low-depth marking is opt-in via `low_cov_threshold`; error-profile collection in summaries is opt-in via `include_error_profile`.

## Development
```bash
pip install -e ".[dev]"           # tests + linting/coverage helpers
pip install -e ".[plots]"         # add matplotlib for PNG histograms
pip install -e ".[all]"           # everything above in one go
pytest
```

## Notes
- Outputs are JSON-first to play well with downstream pipelines.
- Plotting helpers emit file paths (PNG); no base64 payloads are returned.
